how much work goes behind a wooden toy
by haba from regional forests around our
production site in bad wolf in Upper
Franconia we use the word children's
dreams are made of we process about 6000
cubic meters of beech per year this
means that a lorry load of wood is
delivered to us almost daily upon
delivery the wood contains about 25
percent humidity that is why it must be
well ventilated and dried in a
controlled manner first this takes place
in the drying chamber by means it is
measuring instruments the drying process
is effected by the aid of computers the
wood is forwarded to processing once
humidity is down to 8% in the first
operations the wood is cut into
predefined sizes and then sorted the
well-trained eyes of our employees help
to obtain the maximum out of each Bank
a laser measuring system controls
cutting to size subsequently the pieces
are sorted according to the product
benign articles of product so entire
game beaut
the work scheduling Department makes
computer-aided drawings for each single
component of the product this profile is
transferred online to the to making
departments all if you look from this
contour the corresponding stencil is
made which serves for manufacturing
inappropriate milling tool furthermore
the processing program for the planing
machines is provided ready over
machining tolerances very fairly
complicated although simple looking is
how the rectangular pieces of wood are
brought into shape here 1500 rods are
formed to a monkey's shape each rod is
sawed into 50 pieces making a total of
75 thousand monkeys in our turning shop
countless other shapes are created which
are later manufactured into fruit
decoration characters or game tokens up
to this point all edges are still rough
at a later stage they will be sanded
silky smooth and rounded now the animals
building blocks and decoration elements
receive their color by the way we use
non-toxic water-soluble stains and
varnishes when the elements are colored
they are conveyed to the next work steps
tiny holes are drilled into some of the
bits this is precision work others are
decorated using various printing
techniques here dots are applied in an
imprinting process
at this workstation a house is furnished
with a glossy door the female employees
always fast tediously take care that
each single part is just perfect
here finest lions transform a simple
wooden ball into a happy face the
Assembly of the toys takes place here
each single dolls pram is assembled
carefully the employees are also
responsible for compliance with our high
quality standards our lamps are treated
with care as well a safety check is
compulsory our workflows and work
station are designed in a way which will
also allow the Assembly of our products
in Germany in future our schedule
developed for this purpose is called the
5:8 campaign if an archaeon state fur
does also tear on front iron even the 5a
campaign stands for the sorting out of
parts here unnecessary parts are removed
from the workplace it also stands for
tidying up and establishing order as can
be seen on these peg boards behind us
where tidiness becomes visible keeping
the workplace clean is a substantial
part of this enabling them all ye to
feel comfortable also at his workstation
than to let him work in a safe clean
enjoyable environment transforming
appointments into standards is a further
point this means that we want all
materials to be cleared away to their
positions so that tools are always
retreat with ease and the employees
don't waste time searching for tools
furthermore we want to adhere to these
rules and improve them this purpose we
organise regular group discussions with
the employees about their workplaces
workflow and everyday business in order
to integrate improvement suggestions
which are not yet covered by campaign
using one unit on middle bajean in the
actual numbers explore the final steps
take place in the packaging room
the building blocks are accurately
counted and the games are equipped with
the individual elements then they hit
the trail in order to give long-lasting
pleasure to their future owners